-




OVERVIEW

The TM4C123 port does support a simple SPI FIFO driven SDCARD
interface. No locking is implemented. The timeout interface uses the
internal DWT->CYCCNT of the Cortex-M4. The code is set up per default
for the "Color LCD Booster Pack" available throu www.tindie.com. The
pinout chosen was the "legacy pinout". Repurposing this to any other pinout if
fairly straight forward in tm4c123_disk.h.
-



CORE INTERFACE

No locking is implemented at the core interface level. There is no
support for RFAT_PORT_CORE_TIMEDATE, which could however be derived
from a RTC module.
-



DISK INTERFACE

No locking is implemented at the disk interface level.

The timoeut support is implemented via the DWT->CYCCNT. This is a
freerunning counter at the core clock frequency. With a 80MHz core
clock, it will wrap around in about 53.6 seconds. The is deemed to be
sufficient for most non-RTOS applications. Since this timer is always
present, there is no good reason to fall back to estimating the SPI
clock cycles.
-




DISK SPI INTERFACE

The default configuration is to not use CD and WP pins, as they are
not present on the sample target, but instead sense the pullup resistor on the
SDCARD_CS line. The macros that would make use of CD and WP are commented in
tm4c123_disk.h, and could be properly defined for other SDCARD modules that
support them. N.b. that there is no standard as to what logic level CD and WP
would return, hence there are macros to allow inversion of the logic
level. Typically SD is inverted (so that it does not consume power when a card
is missing), which WD is  non-inverted.

With the default target the SPI bus is shared between the SDCARD and a
TFT. Thus there is logic in tm4c123_disk_select() to reprogam the
poper SSI registers to allow different protocols and speeds on the SPI
bus.

The tm4c123_disk_send_block() and tm4c123_disk_recieve_block()
routines make heavy use of the SSI FIFO, and interleave CRC16
calculation with sending/receiving data. With the default 20MHz SPI
bus SCLK setup, there are enough spare clock cycles to compute the
CRC16 between write to the SSI FIFO.

It should be noted that 25MHz is the upper limit generally available
on SDCARDs (unless they would support a high speed mode). However in
real live of a lot of the SDCARD modules do not work above
12.5MHz. Hence some experimentation is be needed when porting to a
new target.
-
